---
title: Our story begins
published_date: "2021-05-05 17:46:42 +0000"
layout: default.liquid
is_draft: false
---
I've begun publishing a blog. 

Here I will ramble.

Every skill needs practice.
I have an easy time practicing skills other than writing, such as programming, 
as I find them easier to get into.

I use [Cobalt](https://cobalt-org.github.io) to handle the static site generation
and git to store everything.
So far cobalt seems like a nice tool, and it's in a language I'm familiar with, so
if I need more features or run into bugs, I'm confidant that I can implement or
fix them.
I'm hoping that using familiar tools will help ease the writing process.

The style, gruvbox-dark, and the other theme components, were taken from the
wonderful website of Christine Dodrill, 
[christine.website](https://christine.website).
Since gruvbox-dark is theme of my desktop, This eases my transition between 
writing and viewing, which I do often in my writing process.
I learned this switching from writing LaTeX for journal articles, none of
which are published, earlier in my carrier.

Another habit that I picked up from writing LaTeX, is to both wrap words at
about 80 characters and put a newline at the end of each sentence.
This may seem counter-intuitive, but this reduces the noise within git diffs,
as there is no need to re-flow whole paragraphs to add a word in the first 
sentence.

I think I'll start this blog by recalling building my keyboards, ending with the
keyboard that I'm typing on now.
