---
title: Dactyl Build Log
published_date: "2021-05-06 00:46:03 +0000"
layout: default.liquid
is_draft: false
---
After a while with typing on a goldtouch, I bought a Kinesis Advantage as
I missed having thumb keys and typing on my M-x Butterfly is an unmitigated
ergonomic disaster.

Some time in 2018, I found out about the Dactyl project, an improvement over
the Kinesis Advantage in a few ways, and decided to build one.

This keyboard would require the use of 3D printing and, luckily, my work had 
recently purchased some 3D printers, a few Form Labs 2, that the mere employees
could use.
So, before I had purchased key switches or MCUs I asked to have the top part of
a Dactyl printed.
Since it would take such a long time, It was scheduled for a pair of weekends.

Before the printing got started, I dived into the wild world of key switches and
key caps.
After having typed on both Cherry MX Clears and Browns, I was looking for 
something that was not as heavy, that is required less activation force, than
a clear, and had a larger tactile bump than browns.
I eventually settled on Khail Box Browns, which have a further advantage that
they were more stable and would not wiggle much at the top of the key travel.
Having tried the DSA caps for my M-x Butterfly, I had found them to be slightly
too narrow at the top, creating a frequent feeling of hitting keys on their
side.
To mitigate this issue, I selected SA key caps as they have a wider top.

I selected the
[Maxim MAX32625pico](https://os.mbed.com/platforms/MAX32625PICO/), as It was
one of the few MCUs that both had Mbed OS support and was in theory small 
enough to fit into the case.
I wanted Mbed OS support, as I was employed to work on Mbed OS professionally
at the time, and thought this project would be a good chance to dog-food.

After the prints were done and I had spent hours cutting all of the rafts off
of the bottom of the print with flush cutters, I set out to solder the matrix.

This time, the MCU boards low pin count required that I solder the matrix as
6 rows by 6 columns.
With those 12 pins taken up by the matrix, and the 2 pins needed for serial
communication with the other half of the keyboard, I had allocated all 14 IO 
pins on the development board.

Soldering this keyboard took quite a bit longer than the M-x Butterfly, as it
had nearly twice as many keys, having 70 instead of the minimalist 42 of the
M-x butterfly.
Further, I tried to solder this one with as low a profile as I could, as then
backing panel was reportedly a very snug fit, and any extra space taken up by
wiring would make it difficult to install.

Again, I produced a custom keyboard firmware which is hosted on github as 
[my max-keyboard repo](https://github.com/theotherjimmy/max-keyboard).
This time, I decided that I would not need any layering, as the keyboard would
have plenty of keys, 2 more than the Kinesis Advantage I was accustomed to and
typed on without layers.
This saved me some implementation time, though my second time through writing 
keyboard firmware went quicker than the first, bringing the process down
to no more than a week.

This time through writing the firmware, I used C++, though I wrote in a style
that was more reminiscent of C.
This firmware, while it worked, would occasionally be behind by a few frames,
and consumed much more flash than was truly needed.
I attribute both of these to the fact that, at the time of writing, it was
difficult to use Mbed OS without its RTX RTOS.
Further, the USB stack that I was using, or forced to use by lack of 
alternatives, required a specific version of Mbed OS that does not support 
compiling without the RTOS (A feature that would later consume most of my time
for 3 months), and I did not feel like back-porting the RTOS-less support for
something as trivial as reducing my flash size.
I decided that it was not worth fixing, that the flash size was merely an 
aesthetic issue, and that the rare delays were something that I would get
used to with time.

Further aesthetic issues with that the firmware exhibited included that 
the left and right half of the keyboard were switched with conditional 
compilation within main and that the keyboard layout was in raw hex bytes.
These did not bother me much as once the firmware worked well enough I stopped.

I then constructed a stand for this keyboard out of K'Nex, which worked well
enough.
If you bumped the keyboard, sometimes it would fall slightly off the stand,
causing me to have to adjust it.
The stand had a modest tent to it, at most 15 degrees.

Typing on my new dactyl keyboard was easier compared to my Kinesis Advantage.
The furthest rows from the home row were closer, and the bowl of the thumb keys
made them easier to reach as well.

I typed on this keyboard for 2 years, keeping it at the office in which I 
worked on a stand of K'Nex.
It started many conversations with coworkers and earned me, or my cubicle
really, some amount of fame.
It had developed a bit of a stutter in a few of the keys, strangely in keys
that I typed rarely.
Once the world went into lock down from Covid-19, I grabbed this keyboard from
the office.

Working from home, I attempted to recreate the experience I with this Dactyl
in the office.
However, at home I had a keyboard tray that kept knocking the Dactyl off of the
stand and the stutter worsened.

I then resolved to correct the stutter with a firmware revision.
However, after a few minutes I gave up, as I did not like working with the
tools I had developed for so long (more on that probably never).

So I swapped the Kinesis Advantage back into use, retiring the Dactyl to the 
closet, in the hopes that one day I would rewrite the firmware in a way that I
would have more fun developing.
